README.md, before:

# NoPassword

[![Ruby](https://github.com/rocketshipio/nopassword/actions/workflows/ruby.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/rocketshipio/nopassword/actions/workflows/ruby.yml)
[![Gem Version](https://badge.fury.io/rb/nopassword.svg)](https://rubygems.org/gems/nopassword)

NoPassword is a toolkit that makes it easy to implement secure, passwordless authentication via email, SMS, or any other side-channel. It also includes OAuth controllers for Google, Apple, and GitHub sign-in.

## Installation

Add this line to your Rails application's Gemfile:

```bash
$ bundle add nopassword
```

Then install the controllers and views:

```bash
$ bundle exec rails generate nopassword:install
```

Add the route to your `config/routes.rb`:

```ruby
nopassword EmailAuthenticationsController
```

Restart the development server and head to `http://localhost:3000/email_authentications/new`.

## How It Works

NoPassword uses a session-bound token approach:

1. User enters their email in your app
2. A 128-bit random token is generated and stored in the user's session
3. A link containing the token is emailed to the user
4. User clicks the link, which only works in the same browser that requested it

### Why is this secure?

The token in the email is useless without the matching session. An attacker who intercepts the email would need BOTH:
- The link from the email
- The victim's session cookie

If they already have the session cookie, they already have access to the session anyway.

### How is this different from other magic link gems?

Most magic link gems put the entire secret in the email. Anyone with the link can authenticate from any browser.

NoPassword binds the link to the user's session. The link only works in the browser that requested it, adding a second factor: possession of the session cookie.

### Rate limiting

NoPassword does not rate limit email sending. That's your responsibility. Use Rails' built-in rate limiting:

```ruby
class EmailAuthenticationsController < NoPassword::EmailAuthenticationsController
  rate_limit to: 5, within: 1.minute, only: :create, with: -> {
    flash[:alert] = "Too many requests. Please wait a minute."
    redirect_to url_for(action: :new)
  }
end
```

## Usage

Customize the installed controller to integrate with your user system:

```ruby
class EmailAuthenticationsController < NoPassword::EmailAuthenticationsController
  def verification_succeeded(email)
    self.current_user = User.find_or_create_by!(email: email)
    redirect_to dashboard_url
  end
end
```

### Hook Methods

Override these methods to customize behavior:

```ruby
class EmailAuthenticationsController < NoPassword::EmailAuthenticationsController
  # Called when the user successfully verifies their email
  def verification_succeeded(email)
    redirect_to root_url
  end

  # Called when the link has expired
  def verification_expired(verification)
    flash[:alert] = "Link has expired. Please try again."
    redirect_to url_for(action: :new)
  end

  # Called when the token is invalid
  def verification_failed(verification)
    flash.now[:alert] = verification.errors.full_messages.to_sentence
    render :show, status: :unprocessable_entity
  end

  # Called when the link is opened in a different browser
  def verification_different_browser(verification)
    flash.now[:alert] = "Please open this link in the browser where you requested it."
    render :show, status: :unprocessable_entity
  end

  # Customize how the email is sent
  def deliver_challenge(challenge)
    EmailAuthenticationMailer
      .with(email: challenge.email, url: show_url(challenge.token))
      .authentication_email
      .deliver_later
  end

  # Default URL to redirect to after authentication
  def after_authentication_url
    root_url
  end
end
```

### Handling Different Browser

When a user opens the link in a different browser (e.g., email app's webview), the verification will fail because there's no matching session. Override the `verification_different_browser` hook to customize this behavior:

```ruby
class EmailAuthenticationsController < NoPassword::EmailAuthenticationsController
  def verification_different_browser(verification)
    # Show a page explaining they need to copy the link to their original browser
    render :different_browser
  end
end
```

## Ejecting for Full Control

The generator gives you views you can customize. If you need full control over the controller too, include the concern directly:

```ruby
class SessionsController < ApplicationController
  include NoPassword::EmailAuthentication

  def verification_succeeded(email)
    self.current_user = User.find_or_create_by!(email: email)
    redirect_to dashboard_url
  end
end
```

Then use `nopassword` with your controller. The routes come with the concern:

```ruby
# config/routes.rb
nopassword SessionsController  # generates /sessions routes
```

The routes are derived from your controller name. To customize the path:

```ruby
# config/routes.rb
nopassword SessionsController, path: "login"  # generates /login routes
```

Or skip the concern entirely and use the models directly with your own views and routes:

```ruby
class SessionsController < ApplicationController
  def new
    @authentication = NoPassword::Email::Authentication.new(session)
  end

  def create
    @authentication = NoPassword::Email::Authentication.new(session)
    @authentication.email = params[:email]

    if @authentication.valid? && @authentication.challenge.save
      @authentication.save
      # Send your own email
      SessionMailer.with(url: verify_url(@authentication.challenge.token)).deliver_later
      redirect_to :check_email
    else
      render :new, status: :unprocessable_entity
    end
  end

  def show
    @authentication = NoPassword::Email::Authentication.new(session)
    @verification = @authentication.verification(token: params[:id])
  end

  def update
    @authentication = NoPassword::Email::Authentication.new(session)
    @verification = @authentication.verification(token: params[:id])

    if @verification.verify
      self.current_user = User.find_or_create_by!(email: @authentication.email)
      @authentication.delete
      redirect_to dashboard_url
    else
      render :show, status: :unprocessable_entity
    end
  end
end
```

## Architecture

NoPassword is organized into composable modules:

```
NoPassword
├── Link                            # Token challenge/verification
│   ├── Base                        # Session storage mechanics
│   ├── Challenge                   # Generates token, stores identifier, TTL
│   └── Verification                # Validates token, checks expiration
├── Session                         # Controller helpers for session management
│   └── Authentication              # Stores return_url, wraps Link
├── Email                           # Email-specific implementation
│   ├── Authentication              # Adds email validation
│   ├── Challenge                   # Aliases identifier as email
│   └── Mailer                      # ActionMailer for sending links
├── EmailAuthentication             # Controller concern with all actions
├── EmailAuthenticationsController  # Ready-to-use controller
└── OAuth
    ├── GoogleAuthorizationsController
    ├── AppleAuthorizationsController
    └── GithubAuthorizationsController
```

### Extending for SMS or other channels

The `Link` module is channel-agnostic. To add SMS support:

```ruby
class SmsAuthentication < NoPassword::Session::Authentication
  attribute :phone, :string
  validates :phone, presence: true, format: { with: /\A\+?[1-9]\d{1,14}\z/ }

  def identifier
    phone
  end
end
```

## OAuth Authorizations

NoPassword includes OAuth controllers for Google, Apple, and GitHub. Create a controller that inherits from the OAuth controller:

```ruby
# app/controllers/google_authorizations_controller.rb
class GoogleAuthorizationsController < NoPassword::OAuth::GoogleAuthorizationsController
  def self.credentials = Rails.application.credentials.google
  def self.client_id = credentials.client_id
  def self.client_secret = credentials.client_secret

  protected
    def authorization_succeeded(sso)
      user = User.find_or_create_by(email: sso.fetch("email"))
      user.update!(name: sso.fetch("name"))

      self.current_user = user
      redirect_to root_url
    end

    def authorization_failed
      redirect_to login_path, alert: "OAuth authorization failed"
    end
end
```

Or with environment variables:

```ruby
class GoogleAuthorizationsController < NoPassword::OAuth::GoogleAuthorizationsController
  def self.client_id = ENV["GOOGLE_CLIENT_ID"]
  def self.client_secret = ENV["GOOGLE_CLIENT_SECRET"]

  # ...
end
```

### GitHub

```ruby
class GithubAuthorizationsController < NoPassword::OAuth::GithubAuthorizationsController
  def self.client_id = ENV["GITHUB_CLIENT_ID"]
  def self.client_secret = ENV["GITHUB_CLIENT_SECRET"]

  protected
    def authorization_succeeded(user_info)
      user = User.find_or_create_by!(github_id: user_info.fetch("id"))
      user.update!(
        name: user_info["name"],
        email: user_info["email"],
        github_login: user_info["login"]
      )

      self.current_user = user
      redirect_to root_url
    end

    def authorization_failed
      redirect_to login_path, alert: "GitHub authorization failed"
    end
end
```

Add the route:

```ruby
# ./config/routes.rb
nopassword GoogleAuthorizationsController
```

Create sign-in buttons (OAuth must be initiated via POST for CSRF protection):

```erb
<%= form_tag google_authorization_path, data: { turbo: false } do %>
  <%= submit_tag "Sign in with Google" %>
<% end %>

<%= form_tag github_authorization_path, data: { turbo: false } do %>
  <%= submit_tag "Sign in with GitHub" %>
<% end %>
```

## Why NoPassword?

Passwords are a pain:

1. **People choose weak passwords** - Complexity requirements make them hard to remember
2. **People forget passwords** - Password reset flows use email anyway
3. **Password fatigue** - Users appreciate not having to create yet another password

## Contributing

If you'd like to contribute, start a discussion at https://github.com/rocketshipio/nopassword/discussions/categories/ideas.

## License

The gem is available as open source under the terms of the [MIT License](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

Commit message:

Add Prior Art section to README
Explains why NoPassword uses controllers instead of Rack middleware.

README.md, after:

# NoPassword

[![Ruby](https://github.com/rocketshipio/nopassword/actions/workflows/ruby.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/rocketshipio/nopassword/actions/workflows/ruby.yml)
[![Gem Version](https://badge.fury.io/rb/nopassword.svg)](https://rubygems.org/gems/nopassword)

NoPassword is a toolkit that makes it easy to implement secure, passwordless authentication via email, SMS, or any other side-channel. It also includes OAuth controllers for Google, Apple, and GitHub sign-in.

## Installation

Add this line to your Rails application's Gemfile:

```bash
$ bundle add nopassword
```

Then install the controllers and views:

```bash
$ bundle exec rails generate nopassword:install
```

Add the route to your `config/routes.rb`:

```ruby
nopassword EmailAuthenticationsController
```

Restart the development server and head to `http://localhost:3000/email_authentications/new`.

## How It Works

NoPassword uses a session-bound token approach:

1. User enters their email in your app
2. A 128-bit random token is generated and stored in the user's session
3. A link containing the token is emailed to the user
4. User clicks the link, which only works in the same browser that requested it

### Why is this secure?

The token in the email is useless without the matching session. An attacker who intercepts the email would need BOTH:
- The link from the email
- The victim's session cookie

If they already have the session cookie, they already have access to the session anyway.

### How is this different from other magic link gems?

Most magic link gems put the entire secret in the email. Anyone with the link can authenticate from any browser.

NoPassword binds the link to the user's session. The link only works in the browser that requested it, adding a second factor: possession of the session cookie.

### Rate limiting

NoPassword does not rate limit email sending. That's your responsibility. Use Rails' built-in rate limiting:

```ruby
class EmailAuthenticationsController < NoPassword::EmailAuthenticationsController
  rate_limit to: 5, within: 1.minute, only: :create, with: -> {
    flash[:alert] = "Too many requests. Please wait a minute."
    redirect_to url_for(action: :new)
  }
end
```

## Usage

Customize the installed controller to integrate with your user system:

```ruby
class EmailAuthenticationsController < NoPassword::EmailAuthenticationsController
  def verification_succeeded(email)
    self.current_user = User.find_or_create_by!(email: email)
    redirect_to dashboard_url
  end
end
```

### Hook Methods

Override these methods to customize behavior:

```ruby
class EmailAuthenticationsController < NoPassword::EmailAuthenticationsController
  # Called when the user successfully verifies their email
  def verification_succeeded(email)
    redirect_to root_url
  end

  # Called when the link has expired
  def verification_expired(verification)
    flash[:alert] = "Link has expired. Please try again."
    redirect_to url_for(action: :new)
  end

  # Called when the token is invalid
  def verification_failed(verification)
    flash.now[:alert] = verification.errors.full_messages.to_sentence
    render :show, status: :unprocessable_entity
  end

  # Called when the link is opened in a different browser
  def verification_different_browser(verification)
    flash.now[:alert] = "Please open this link in the browser where you requested it."
    render :show, status: :unprocessable_entity
  end

  # Customize how the email is sent
  def deliver_challenge(challenge)
    EmailAuthenticationMailer
      .with(email: challenge.email, url: show_url(challenge.token))
      .authentication_email
      .deliver_later
  end

  # Default URL to redirect to after authentication
  def after_authentication_url
    root_url
  end
end
```

### Handling Different Browser

When a user opens the link in a different browser (e.g., email app's webview), the verification will fail because there's no matching session. Override the `verification_different_browser` hook to customize this behavior:

```ruby
class EmailAuthenticationsController < NoPassword::EmailAuthenticationsController
  def verification_different_browser(verification)
    # Show a page explaining they need to copy the link to their original browser
    render :different_browser
  end
end
```

## Ejecting for Full Control

The generator gives you views you can customize. If you need full control over the controller too, include the concern directly:

```ruby
class SessionsController < ApplicationController
  include NoPassword::EmailAuthentication

  def verification_succeeded(email)
    self.current_user = User.find_or_create_by!(email: email)
    redirect_to dashboard_url
  end
end
```

Then use `nopassword` with your controller. The routes come with the concern:

```ruby
# config/routes.rb
nopassword SessionsController  # generates /sessions routes
```

The routes are derived from your controller name. To customize the path:

```ruby
# config/routes.rb
nopassword SessionsController, path: "login"  # generates /login routes
```

Or skip the concern entirely and use the models directly with your own views and routes:

```ruby
class SessionsController < ApplicationController
  def new
    @authentication = NoPassword::Email::Authentication.new(session)
  end

  def create
    @authentication = NoPassword::Email::Authentication.new(session)
    @authentication.email = params[:email]

    if @authentication.valid? && @authentication.challenge.save
      @authentication.save
      # Send your own email
      SessionMailer.with(url: verify_url(@authentication.challenge.token)).deliver_later
      redirect_to :check_email
    else
      render :new, status: :unprocessable_entity
    end
  end

  def show
    @authentication = NoPassword::Email::Authentication.new(session)
    @verification = @authentication.verification(token: params[:id])
  end

  def update
    @authentication = NoPassword::Email::Authentication.new(session)
    @verification = @authentication.verification(token: params[:id])

    if @verification.verify
      self.current_user = User.find_or_create_by!(email: @authentication.email)
      @authentication.delete
      redirect_to dashboard_url
    else
      render :show, status: :unprocessable_entity
    end
  end
end
```

## Architecture

NoPassword is organized into composable modules:

```
NoPassword
├── Link                            # Token challenge/verification
│   ├── Base                        # Session storage mechanics
│   ├── Challenge                   # Generates token, stores identifier, TTL
│   └── Verification                # Validates token, checks expiration
├── Session                         # Controller helpers for session management
│   └── Authentication              # Stores return_url, wraps Link
├── Email                           # Email-specific implementation
│   ├── Authentication              # Adds email validation
│   ├── Challenge                   # Aliases identifier as email
│   └── Mailer                      # ActionMailer for sending links
├── EmailAuthentication             # Controller concern with all actions
├── EmailAuthenticationsController  # Ready-to-use controller
└── OAuth
    ├── GoogleAuthorizationsController
    ├── AppleAuthorizationsController
    └── GithubAuthorizationsController
```

### Extending for SMS or other channels

The `Link` module is channel-agnostic. To add SMS support:

```ruby
class SmsAuthentication < NoPassword::Session::Authentication
  attribute :phone, :string
  validates :phone, presence: true, format: { with: /\A\+?[1-9]\d{1,14}\z/ }

  def identifier
    phone
  end
end
```

## OAuth Authorizations

NoPassword includes OAuth controllers for Google, Apple, and GitHub. Create a controller that inherits from the OAuth controller:

```ruby
# app/controllers/google_authorizations_controller.rb
class GoogleAuthorizationsController < NoPassword::OAuth::GoogleAuthorizationsController
  def self.credentials = Rails.application.credentials.google
  def self.client_id = credentials.client_id
  def self.client_secret = credentials.client_secret

  protected
    def authorization_succeeded(sso)
      user = User.find_or_create_by(email: sso.fetch("email"))
      user.update!(name: sso.fetch("name"))

      self.current_user = user
      redirect_to root_url
    end

    def authorization_failed
      redirect_to login_path, alert: "OAuth authorization failed"
    end
end
```

Or with environment variables:

```ruby
class GoogleAuthorizationsController < NoPassword::OAuth::GoogleAuthorizationsController
  def self.client_id = ENV["GOOGLE_CLIENT_ID"]
  def self.client_secret = ENV["GOOGLE_CLIENT_SECRET"]

  # ...
end
```

### GitHub

```ruby
class GithubAuthorizationsController < NoPassword::OAuth::GithubAuthorizationsController
  def self.client_id = ENV["GITHUB_CLIENT_ID"]
  def self.client_secret = ENV["GITHUB_CLIENT_SECRET"]

  protected
    def authorization_succeeded(user_info)
      user = User.find_or_create_by!(github_id: user_info.fetch("id"))
      user.update!(
        name: user_info["name"],
        email: user_info["email"],
        github_login: user_info["login"]
      )

      self.current_user = user
      redirect_to root_url
    end

    def authorization_failed
      redirect_to login_path, alert: "GitHub authorization failed"
    end
end
```

Add the route:

```ruby
# ./config/routes.rb
nopassword GoogleAuthorizationsController
```

Create sign-in buttons (OAuth must be initiated via POST for CSRF protection):

```erb
<%= form_tag google_authorization_path, data: { turbo: false } do %>
  <%= submit_tag "Sign in with Google" %>
<% end %>

<%= form_tag github_authorization_path, data: { turbo: false } do %>
  <%= submit_tag "Sign in with GitHub" %>
<% end %>
```

## Why NoPassword?

Passwords are a pain:

1. **People choose weak passwords** - Complexity requirements make them hard to remember
2. **People forget passwords** - Password reset flows use email anyway
3. **Password fatigue** - Users appreciate not having to create yet another password

## Prior Art

NoPassword isn't the first authentication library for Rails, but it takes a different approach:

- **[Devise](https://github.com/heartcombo/devise)** - The kitchen sink of Rails authentication. Great if you need everything, but heavyweight for passwordless-only apps. Its [devise-passwordless](https://github.com/abevoelker/devise-passwordless) extension exists but inherits all of Devise's complexity.

- **[OmniAuth](https://github.com/omniauth/omniauth)** - Rack middleware for OAuth. The problem: it runs at the Rack layer, so you don't have access to Rails routes, path helpers, or URL generation. You end up hardcoding callback URLs and fighting the framework.

- **[Passwordless](https://github.com/mikker/passwordless)** - Similar idea to NoPassword, but tries to manage `current_user` and authorization. NoPassword stops at authentication and lets you handle the rest.

- **[Rodauth](https://github.com/jeremyevans/rodauth)** - Powerful and secure, but also Rack-based with its own routing DSL.

### Why controllers instead of Rack middleware?

Rack middleware runs outside of Rails. That means:

- No access to `url_for`, named routes, or path helpers
- No Rails route introspection or inflection
- Callback URLs get hardcoded
- Debugging requires understanding a separate abstraction ("strategies", "phases", etc.)

NoPassword is just Rails controllers. You inherit from them, override hooks, and use `url_for` like anywhere else in Rails. No new abstractions to learn.

## Contributing

If you'd like to contribute, start a discussion at https://github.com/rocketshipio/nopassword/discussions/categories/ideas.

## License

The gem is available as open source under the terms of the [MIT License](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).
